Numpy RNGs blog post (#135)
scientific-python/blog.scientific-python.org: content/posts/numpy/numpy-rng/index.md

---

> title: "Good practices with numpy random number generators"

Reviewer: When referring to the name of the project (so not code), we should use the proper capitalisation.
```suggestion
title: "Good practices with NumPy random number generators"
```

date: 2023-08-31T23:22:46+02:00
draft: false
description: "
Good practices with numpy random number generators
"
tags: ["tutorials", numpy, rng]
displayInList: true
author: ["Albert Thomas"]
---

> Unless you are working on a problem where you can afford a true Random Number Generator (RNG), which is basically never for most of us, implementing something random means relying on a pseudo Random Number Generator. I want to share here what I have learned about good practices with pseudo RNGs and especially the ones available in [numpy](https://numpy.org/). I assume a certain knowledge of numpy and that numpy 1.17 or greater is used. The reason for this is that great new features were introduced in the [random](https://numpy.org/doc/1.18/reference/random/index.html) module of version 1.17. As `numpy` is usually imported as `np`, I will sometimes use `np` instead of `numpy`. Finally, as I will not talk about true RNGs, RNG will always mean pseudo RNG in the rest of this blog post.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unless you are working on a problem where you can afford a true Random Number Generator (RNG), which is basically never for most of us, implementing something random means relying on a pseudo Random Number Generator. I want to share here what I have learned about good practices with pseudo RNGs and especially the ones available in [NumPy](https://numpy.org/). I assume a certain knowledge of numpy and that NumPy 1.17 or greater is used. The reason for this is that great new features were introduced in the [random](https://numpy.org/doc/1.18/reference/random/index.html) module of version 1.17. As `numpy` is usually imported as `np`, I will sometimes use `np` instead of `numpy`. Finally, as I will not talk about true RNGs, RNG will always mean pseudo RNG in the rest of this blog post.
```

### The main messages
1. Avoid using the global numpy RNG. This means that you should avoid using [`np.random.seed`](https://numpy.org/doc/1.18/reference/random/generated/numpy.random.seed.html) and `np.random.*` functions, such as `np.random.random`, to generate random values.
2. Create a new RNG and pass it around using the [`np.random.default_rng`](https://numpy.org/doc/1.18/reference/random/generator.html#numpy.random.default_rng) function.
3. Be careful with parallel computations and rely on [numpy strategies for reproducible parallel number generation](https://numpy.org/doc/1.18/reference/random/parallel.html).

> Note that with numpy <1.17 the way to create a new RNG is to use [`np.random.RandomState`](https://numpy.org/doc/1.18/reference/random/legacy.html#numpy.random.RandomState) which is based on the popular Mersenne Twister 19937 algorithm. This is also how the global numpy RNG is created. It is still possible to use this function in versions higher than 1.17 but it is now recommended to use `default_rng` which returns an instance of the statistically better [PCG64](https://www.pcg-random.org) RNG.

Reviewer: It might be worth noting a slight nuance (either here or in some advance section or footnote). `np.random.RandomState` is going to be around and there is no plan to mark it at legacy either. This is pretty much the recommended RNG to use for testing as there are still the same guarantee as before in terms of byte stream stability. Which the new infra relaxes a bit.

Author: > This is pretty much the recommended RNG to use for testing as there are still the same guarantee as before in terms of byte stream stability

you mean for existing projects so that tests won't break?

Reviewer: Yes. But also if you write new tests, the official recommended way is to use `RandomState`. I agree that it's not clear from their doc, but maintainers of NumPy told me that a few times.

Author: is it that Mersenne Twister has better properties for testing?

Reviewer: No the reason is that because they still provide strong guarantees of stability with `RandomState`, the tests are less likely to break. But because of known statistical issues, it's not recommended to use these for anything else than production. Bugs are known and cannot be fixed due to this same guarantee.

TBH, I personally only use `Generator` for all my code for simplicity. It's really not like this is going to break all the time.

Author: Ok got it. I added a sentence, but do we want to discourage this kind of practice (even for tests) or at least not encourage it?

> The implicit global RandomState behind the `np.random.*` convenience functions can cause problems, especially when threads or other forms of concurrency are involved. Global state is always problematic. We categorically recommend avoiding using the convenience functions when reproducibility is involved. [...] The preferred best practice for getting reproducible pseudorandom numbers is to instantiate a generator object with a seed and pass it around.

In short:
* Instead of using `np.random.seed`, which reseeds the already created global numpy RNG and then using `np.random.*` functions you should create a new RNG.
* You should create one RNG at the beginning of your script (with a seed if you want reproducibility) and use this RNG in the rest of your script.

To create a new RNG you can use the `default_rng` function as illustrated in the [introduction of the random module documentation](https://numpy.org/doc/1.18/reference/random/index.html#introduction):

```python
import numpy as np

> seed = 12345

Reviewer: Can you change that (and bellow) to a more random value? This is to prevent people that copy paste to 1. copy all the time the same value (hence arguably not have a RNG anymore and have the same number generator as everyone), 2. the doc suggest that larger numbers should be used to have a better entropy (though there are better safeguard now as opposed to the old infra as I understand it.)

Author: > though there are better safeguard now as opposed to the old infra as I understand it.

yes I thought that with the new seed sequence algorithm we were sure to get a good initial state for the RNG, even with a bad input seed from the user?

Author: > Can you change that (and bellow) to a more random value?

sorry can you elaborate a bit? you mean something that looks a bit more random like `74329087451`?

Author: Ok I found more information about that at https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/index.html#random-sampling-numpy-random

```python
import numpy as np
from joblib import Parallel, delayed

def stochastic_function(seed, high=10):
    rng = np.random.default_rng(seed)
    return rng.integers(high, size=5)

seed = 98765
# create the RNG that you want to pass around
rng = np.random.default_rng(seed)
# get the SeedSequence of the passed RNG

> ss = rng.bit_generator._seed_seq

Reviewer: I would add some very clear+visible warning that this is using a private API. In general we really try not to show usage of private methods as there is no guarantee that we won't change these (and we want to be free to do so).

Reviewer 2: Why not start from a `SeedSequence`?

Author: for this example I agree that we could start from a `SeedSequence` but when this occurs at any place in a larger python code, and you are only given the passed RNG you need to get the seed sequence of that RNG.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure why the use of private API here.  I think this was public for a long time (although maybe necessary for the legacy mtrand?)

We also implemnted `rng.spawn(1)` and `bitgen.spawn(1)` more recently, although I think allowing `child = rng.spawn()` (no number to get a single one) might be a nice extension.

Author: thanks @seberg for the suggestion! I was not aware of the spawn method, just saw it's in numpy >=1.25, good to know!

I checked for the _seed_seq attribute quickly in the doc but could not find anything (https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/generated/numpy.random.Generator.bit_generator.html#numpy.random.Generator.bit_generator), am I missing something?

While you are I actually have another question regarding seeding: it's written in the doc of the random module that it is good to have a large number as a seed to have a unique number different than anyone else. But it is also said in the bit generator doc that a seed lower than 32 bits means that there are some initial states that are impossible to reach. Is that the case even with seed sequence? I thought seed sequence was supposed to create good initial states from bad seed but as I saw on the PCG website I guess seed sequence cannot do everything :).

@stefanv I can open another PR to improve this if that's possible?

Reviewer 2: @albertcthomas You are welcome to modify your blog post!

Reviewer 3: > ed lower than 32 bits means that there are some initial states that are impossible to reach. Is that the case even with seed sequence? I thought seed sequence was supposed to create good initial states from bad seed but as I saw on the PCG website I guess seed sequence cannot do everything :).

I am not the person who knows such details without research, Robert Kern would be.  Seedsequence mixes well, maybe.  But if the initial states has more than 32bit of space, then you need more than 32bits of state to reach it all, maybe?

FWIW, I sometimes use:
```
secrets.randbits(128)
```
to just find a perfect seed in the docs (can throw in a `hex` if you like).

# create 5 initial independent states
child_states = ss.spawn(5)

# use 2 processes to run the stochastic_function 5 times with joblib
random_vector = Parallel(n_jobs=2)(delayed(
    stochastic_function)(random_state) for random_state in child_states)
print(random_vector)

# rerun to check that we obtain the same outputs
random_vector = Parallel(n_jobs=2)(delayed(
    stochastic_function)(random_state) for random_state in child_states)
print(random_vector)
```

By using a fixed seed you always get the same results and by using `SeedSequence.spawn` you have an independent RNG for each of the iterations. Note that I used the convenient `default_rng` function in `stochastic_function`. You can also see that the `SeedSequence` of the existing RNG is a private attribute. Accessing the `SeedSequence` might become easier in future versions of numpy (more information [here](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/15322#issuecomment-626400433)).

> ## Resources

Reviewer: Might be of interest, there are discussions still around RNG in the community to bring more uniformisation between packages. These are quite interesting discussions:

https://github.com/scientific-python/specs/pull/180

Author: This is nice, I'll add this to the post.

---
title: "Good practices with NumPy random number generators"
date: 2023-08-31T23:22:46+02:00
draft: false
description: "
Good practices with NumPy random number generators
"
tags: ["tutorials", numpy, rng]
displayInList: true
author: ["Albert Thomas"]
---

> Unless you are working on a problem where you can afford a true Random Number Generator (RNG), which is basically never for most of us, implementing something random means relying on a pseudo Random Number Generator. I want to share here what I have learned about good practices with pseudo RNGs and especially the ones available in [NumPy](https://numpy.org/). I assume a certain knowledge of NumPy and that NumPy 1.17 or greater is used. The reason for this is that great new features were introduced in the [random](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/index.html) module of version 1.17. As `numpy` is usually imported as `np`, I will sometimes use `np` instead of `numpy`. Finally, as I will not talk about true RNGs, RNG will always mean pseudo RNG in the rest of this blog post.

Reviewer 4: I suspect many theoretical computer scientists would take this view:
```
Using Physical Random Sources: It is unclear whether the real world has physical sources
of perfect randomness. We may use sources that seem to have some unpredictability, like
the low order bits of a system clock or thermal noise, but these sources will generally
have biases and, more problematically, correlations. Thus we ask: What can we do with
a source of biased and correlated bits?
```
https://people.seas.harvard.edu/~salil/pseudorandomness/pseudorandomness-Aug10.pdf

> Unless you are working on a problem where you can afford a true Random Number Generator (RNG), which is basically never for most of us, implementing something random means relying on a pseudo Random Number Generator. I want to share here what I have learned about good practices with pseudo RNGs and especially the ones available in [NumPy](https://numpy.org/). I assume a certain knowledge of NumPy and that NumPy 1.17 or greater is used. The reason for this is that great new features were introduced in the [random](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/index.html) module of version 1.17. As `numpy` is usually imported as `np`, I will sometimes use `np` instead of `numpy`. Finally, as I will not talk about true RNGs, RNG will always mean pseudo RNG in the rest of this blog post.

Author: Thanks for the ref @jarrodmillman I was not really aware of these issues about True RNGs

### The main messages
1. Avoid using the global NumPy RNG. This means that you should avoid using [`np.random.seed`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/generated/numpy.random.seed.html) and `np.random.*` functions, such as `np.random.random`, to generate random values.

> 2. Create a new RNG and pass it around using the [`np.random.default_rng`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/generator.html#numpy.random.default_rng) function.

Author: Sorry I will revert this suggested commit, the `np.random.default_rng` is used to create the RNG as well as passing it around so I'd prefer keeping the original formulation.

3. Be careful with parallel computations and rely on [NumPy strategies for reproducible parallel number generation](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/parallel.html).

> Note that with NumPy <1.17 the way to create a new RNG is to use [`np.random.RandomState`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/legacy.html#numpy.random.RandomState) which is based on the popular Mersenne Twister 19937 algorithm. This is also how the global NumPy RNG is created. It is still possible to use this function in versions higher than 1.17 but it is now recommended to use `default_rng` which returns an instance of the statistically better [PCG64](https://www.pcg-random.org) RNG. You might see `np.random.RandomState` being used in tests as it has strong stability guarantees between different NumPy versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that, with the older NumPy <1.17, the way to create a new RNG is to use [`np.random.RandomState`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/legacy.html#numpy.random.RandomState) which is based on the popular Mersenne Twister 19937 algorithm. This is also how the global NumPy RNG is created. This function is still available in newer versions of NumPy, but it is now recommended to use `default_rng` instead, which returns an instance of the statistically better [PCG64](https://www.pcg-random.org) RNG. You might still see `np.random.RandomState` being used in tests as it has strong stability guarantees between different NumPy versions.
```

## Random number generation with NumPy

> When you import `numpy` in your python script a RNG is created behind the scenes. This RNG is the one used when you generate a new random value using a function such as `np.random.random`. I will here refer to this RNG as the global NumPy RNG.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you import `numpy` in your python script, a RNG is created behind the scenes. This RNG is the one used when you generate a new random value using a function such as `np.random.random`. I will here refer to this RNG as the global NumPy RNG.
```

I would probably use "an RNG", but "a RNG" is OK if you imagine people reading "a random number generator".

> Although not recommended, it is a common practice to reset the seed of this global RNG at the beginning of a script using the `np.random.seed` function. Fixing the seed at the beginning ensures that the script is reproducible: the same values and results will be produced each time you run it. However, although sometimes convenient, using the global NumPy RNG is considered a bad practice. A simple reason is that using global variables can lead to undesired side effects. For instance one might use `np.random.random` without knowing that the seed of the global RNG was set somewhere else in the codebase. Quoting [Numpy Enhancement Proposal (NEP) 19](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0019-rng-policy.html) by Robert Kern:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Although not recommended, it is a common practice to reset the seed of this global RNG at the beginning of a script using the `np.random.seed` function. Fixing the seed at the beginning ensures that the script is reproducible: the same values and results will be produced each time you run it. However, although sometimes convenient, using the global NumPy RNG is a bad practice. A simple reason is that using global variables can lead to undesired side effects. For instance one might use `np.random.random` without knowing that the seed of the global RNG was set somewhere else in the codebase. Quoting [Numpy Enhancement Proposal (NEP) 19](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0019-rng-policy.html) by Robert Kern:
```

> Although not recommended, it is a common practice to reset the seed of this global RNG at the beginning of a script using the `np.random.seed` function. Fixing the seed at the beginning ensures that the script is reproducible: the same values and results will be produced each time you run it. However, although sometimes convenient, using the global NumPy RNG is considered a bad practice. A simple reason is that using global variables can lead to undesired side effects. For instance one might use `np.random.random` without knowing that the seed of the global RNG was set somewhere else in the codebase. Quoting the [Numpy Enhancement Proposal (NEP) 19](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0019-rng-policy.html) by Robert Kern about the NumPy RNG policy:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although not recommended, it is a common practice to reset the seed of this global RNG at the beginning of a script using the `np.random.seed` function. Fixing the seed at the beginning ensures that the script is reproducible: the same values and results will be produced each time you run it. However, although sometimes convenient, using the global NumPy RNG is considered a bad practice. A simple reason is that using global variables can lead to undesired side effects. For instance one might use `np.random.random` without knowing that the seed of the global RNG was set somewhere else in the codebase. Quoting [Numpy Enhancement Proposal (NEP) 19](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0019-rng-policy.html) by Robert Kern:
```

> The implicit global RandomState behind the `np.random.*` convenience functions can cause problems, especially when threads or other forms of concurrency are involved. Global state is always problematic. We categorically recommend avoiding using the convenience functions when reproducibility is involved. [...] The preferred best practice for getting reproducible pseudorandom numbers is to instantiate a generator object with a seed and pass it around.

In short:

> * Instead of using `np.random.seed`, which reseeds the already created global NumPy RNG and then using `np.random.*` functions you should create a new RNG.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Instead of using `np.random.seed`, which reseeds the already created global NumPy RNG, and then using `np.random.*` functions, you should create a new RNG.
```

> * You should create one RNG at the beginning of your script (with a seed if you want reproducibility) and use this RNG in the rest of your script.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* You should create an RNG at the beginning of your script (with a seed, if you want reproducibility) and use this RNG in the rest of the script.
```

To create a new RNG you can use the `default_rng` function as illustrated in the [introduction of the random module documentation](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/index.html):

```python
import numpy as np

rng = np.random.default_rng()

> rng.random()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
rng.random()  # generate a floating point number between 0 and 1
```

```

> If you want to use a seed for reproducibility, [Numpy documentation](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/index.html#quick-start) recommends using a very large and unique number to have a different seed than anyone else. Another reason is that using a small number for the seed could lead to a bad initialization of the RNG, although `default_rng` now takes care of creating a good initialization from a small number. To obtain a good unique seed you can rely on the [secrets module](https://docs.python.org/3/library/secrets.html). The following code will return a 128 bit number that you can then use as a seed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to use a seed for reproducibility, [the NumPy documentation recommends](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/index.html#quick-start) using a very large and unique number to have a different seed than anyone else. Another reason is that using a small number for the seed could lead to a bad initialization of the RNG, although `default_rng` now takes care of creating a good initialization from a small number. To obtain a good, unique seed you can rely on the [secrets module](https://docs.python.org/3/library/secrets.html). The following code will return a 128 bit number that you can then use as a seed:
```

Reviewer 2: Most people may not see why it's necessary to have different random numbers than other people.

Reviewer 2: What does "bad initialization" mean to the reader?

Author: > What does "bad initialization" mean to the reader?

good point, the issue here is that I do not want to enter into the details of how an RNG works and talk about the RNG states etc... If people want to know more they can check the references given at the end, but I agree that bad initialization is not very clear. I could probably remove this, given that the new SeedSequence algorithm is supposed to build a good initial state from any seed.

> If you want to use a seed for reproducibility, [Numpy documentation](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/index.html#quick-start) recommends using a very large and unique number to have a different seed than anyone else. Another reason is that using a small number for the seed could lead to a bad initialization of the RNG, although `default_rng` now takes care of creating a good initialization from a small number. To obtain a good unique seed you can rely on the [secrets module](https://docs.python.org/3/library/secrets.html). The following code will return a 128 bit number that you can then use as a seed:

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth explaining what a seed is somewhere higher up?

Author: not sure I want to enter into this, I suspect the reader to be familiar with seeding and this is a guide on how to do this properly. Or I would need to write a small paragraph in the intro explaining a bit how an RNG works.

Author: I think I will add a small paragraph in the intro to clarify all this.

```python
import secrets

secrets.randbits(128)
```

When running this code I get `65647437836358831880808032086803839626` for the number to use as my seed. This number is randomly generated so you need to copy paste the value that is returned by `secrets.randbits(128)` otherwise you will have a different seed each time you run your code and thus break reproducibility:

```python
import numpy as np

seed = 65647437836358831880808032086803839626
rng = np.random.default_rng(seed)
rng.random()
```

> The reason for seeding your RNG only once (and passing that RNG around) is that you can lose on the randomness and the independence of the generated random numbers by reseeding the RNG multiple times. Furthermore obtaining a good seed can be time consuming. Once you have a good seed to instantiate your generator you might as well use it. With a good RNG such as the one returned by `default_rng` you will be ensured good randomness (and independence) of the generated numbers. It might be more dangerous to use different seeds: how do you know that the streams of random numbers obtained with two different seeds are not correlated, or I should say less independent than the ones created from the same seed? That being said, [as explained by Robert Kern](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/15322#issuecomment-573890207), with the RNGs and seeding strategies introduced in NumPy 1.17, it could be considered safe enough to recreate new RNGs from the system entropy, e.g. using `default_rng(None)` multiple times. However as explained later be careful when running jobs in parallel and relying on `default_rng(None)`.

Reviewer 2: Can you clarify "lose on the randomness and the independence"?

> The reason for seeding your RNG only once (and passing that RNG around) is that you can lose on the randomness and the independence of the generated random numbers by reseeding the RNG multiple times. Furthermore obtaining a good seed can be time consuming. Once you have a good seed to instantiate your generator you might as well use it. With a good RNG such as the one returned by `default_rng` you will be ensured good randomness (and independence) of the generated numbers. It might be more dangerous to use different seeds: how do you know that the streams of random numbers obtained with two different seeds are not correlated, or I should say less independent than the ones created from the same seed? That being said, [as explained by Robert Kern](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/15322#issuecomment-573890207), with the RNGs and seeding strategies introduced in NumPy 1.17, it could be considered safe enough to recreate new RNGs from the system entropy, e.g. using `default_rng(None)` multiple times. However as explained later be careful when running jobs in parallel and relying on `default_rng(None)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The reason for seeding your RNG only once (and passing that RNG around) is that you can lose on the randomness and the independence of the generated random numbers by reseeding the RNG multiple times. Furthermore obtaining a good seed can be time consuming. Once you have a good seed to instantiate your generator, you might as well use it. With a good RNG such as the one returned by `default_rng` you will be ensured good randomness (and independence) of the generated numbers. It might be more dangerous to use generators derived from different seeds: how do you know that the streams of random numbers obtained from those are not correlated or, I should say, less independent than the ones created from the same seed? [As explained by Robert Kern](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/15322#issuecomment-573890207), with the RNGs and seeding strategies introduced in NumPy 1.17, it is considered fairly safe to create RNGs using system entropy, i.e. using `default_rng(None)` multiple times. However as explained later be careful when running jobs in parallel and relying on `default_rng(None)`.
```

Reviewer 2: It's a bit unclear how the sentences on `default_rng(None)` relate to seeding. Above, you say not to use `None` as the input to `default_rng`, and now that is being suggested, so would be worth clarifying when that's a good idea.

Author: yes good point again, what's not clear in my text is that `default_rng(None)` will still need to obtain a seed from somewhere (e.g. system entropy)

## Passing a NumPy RNG around

As you write functions that you will use on their own as well as in a more complex script it is convenient to be able to pass a seed or your already created RNG. The function `default_rng` allows you to do this very easily. As written above, this function can be used to create a new RNG from your chosen seed, if you pass a seed to it, or from system entropy when passing `None` but you can also pass an already created RNG. In this case the returned RNG is the one that you passed.

```python
import numpy as np

> def stochastic_function(seed, high=10):

Author: note to myself: seed -> rng

    rng = np.random.default_rng(seed)

>     return rng.integers(high, size=5)

Reviewer 2: The API we've been converging on in SPEC 7 is to call the argument `rng` instead of `seed`, but it's fine this way too.

See https://github.com/scientific-python/specs/pull/180

```
You can either pass an `int` seed or your already created RNG to `stochastic_function`. To be perfectly exact, the `default_rng` function returns the exact same RNG passed to it for certain kind of RNGs such at the ones created with `default_rng` itself. You can refer to the [`default_rng` documentation](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/generator.html#numpy.random.default_rng) for more details on the arguments that you can pass to this function.

> Before knowing about `default_rng`, and before NumPy 1.17, I was using the scikit-learn function [`check_random_state`](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.utils.check_random_state.html) which is of course heavily used in the scikit-learn codebase. While writing this post I discovered that this function is now available in [scipy](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/blob/master/scipy/_lib/_util.py#L171). A look at the docstring and/or the source code of this function will give you a good idea about what it does. The differences with `default_rng` are that `check_random_state` currently relies on `np.random.RandomState` and that when `None` is passed to `check_random_state` then the function returns the already existing global NumPy RNG. The latter can be convenient because if you fix the seed of the global RNG before in your script using `np.random.seed`, `check_random_state` returns the generator that you seeded. However, as explained above, this is not the recommended practice and you should be aware of the risks and the side effects.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps better as a footnote, so as not to distract the reader.

## Parallel processing

> You must be careful when using RNGs in conjunction with parallel processing. I usually use the [joblib](https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) library to parallelize my code and I will therefore mainly talk about it. However most of the discussion is not specific to joblib.

Reviewer 2: The "I usually use", "However..." sentences distract a bit from the gist of what you want to convey here. Perhaps simply start with: "You must be careful when using RNGs in parallel processing"... <and here's why> ... and then add any technical details about the libraries you will use/discuss.

Let's consider the context of Monte Carlo simulation: you have a random function returning random outputs and you want to generate these random outputs a lot of times, for instance to compute an empirical mean. If the function is expensive to compute an easy solution to speed up the computation time is to resort to parallel processing. Depending on the parallel processing library or backend that you use different behaviors can be observed. For instance if you do not set the seed yourself it can be the case that forked Python processes use the same random seed, generated for instance from system entropy, and thus produce the exact same outputs which is a waste of computational resources. I learned this the hard way during my PhD. A very nice example illustrating this and other behaviors that one can obtain with joblib is available [here](https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/auto_examples/parallel_random_state.html).

> If you fix the seed at the beginning of your main script for reproducibility and then pass the same RNG to each process to be run in parallel, most of the time this will not give you what you want as this RNG will be deep copied. The same results will thus be produced by each process. One of the solutions is to create as many RNGs as parallel processes with a different seed for each of these RNGs. The issue now is that you cannot choose the seeds as easily as you would think. When you choose two different seeds to instantiate two different RNGs how do you know that the numbers produced by these RNGs will appear as statistically independent? The design of independent RNGs for parallel processes has been an important research question. You can for instance refer to the paper [Random numbers for parallel computers: Requirements and methods, with emphasis on GPUs](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378475416300829) by L'Ecuyer et al. (2017) for a good summary of the different methods on this topic.

Reviewer 2: "reused" instead of "deepcopied"? Each time we use jargon, it risks confusing those not familiar with it, and I don't think the exact mechanism is too relevant here.

Author: On second thoughts, I feel deep copied is more clear as this means that the RNGs will have the same state in each process and thus produce the same numbers. I think reused is a bit less explicit here.

> If you fix the seed at the beginning of your main script for reproducibility and then pass the same RNG to each process to be run in parallel, most of the time this will not give you what you want as this RNG will be deep copied. The same results will thus be produced by each process. One of the solutions is to create as many RNGs as parallel processes with a different seed for each of these RNGs. The issue now is that you cannot choose the seeds as easily as you would think. When you choose two different seeds to instantiate two different RNGs how do you know that the numbers produced by these RNGs will appear as statistically independent? The design of independent RNGs for parallel processes has been an important research question. You can for instance refer to the paper [Random numbers for parallel computers: Requirements and methods, with emphasis on GPUs](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378475416300829) by L'Ecuyer et al. (2017) for a good summary of the different methods on this topic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you fix the seed at the beginning of your main script for reproducibility and then pass the same RNG to each process to be run in parallel, most of the time this will not give you what you want as this RNG will be deep copied. The same results will thus be produced by each process. One of the solutions is to create as many RNGs as parallel processes with a different seed for each of these RNGs. The issue now is that you cannot choose the seeds as easily as you would think. When you choose two different seeds to instantiate two different RNGs how do you know that the numbers produced by these RNGs will appear as statistically independent? The design of independent RNGs for parallel processes has been an important research question. See, for example, [Random numbers for parallel computers: Requirements and methods, with emphasis on GPUs](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378475416300829) by L'Ecuyer et al. (2017) for a good summary of different methods.
```

> From NumPy 1.17, it is now very easy to instantiate independent RNGs. Depending on the RNG that you use, different strategies are easily available as documented in the [Parallel random number generation section](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/parallel.html) of the NumPy documentation. One of the strategies is to use `SeedSequence` which is an algorithm that makes sure that a not so good user-provided seed results in a good initial state for the RNG. Additionally, it ensures that two close seeds will result in two very different initial states for the RNG that are, with very high probability, independent of each other. You can refer to the documentation of [SeedSequence Spawning](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/parallel.html#seedsequence-spawning) for an example on how to generate independent RNGs from a user-provided seed. I here show how you can do this from an already existing RNG and apply it to the [joblib example](https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/auto_examples/parallel_random_state.html#fixing-the-random-state-to-obtain-deterministic-results) mentioned above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with NumPy 1.17, it is now very easy to instantiate independent RNGs. Depending on the type of RNG you use, different strategies are available as documented in the [Parallel random number generation section](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/parallel.html) of the NumPy documentation. One of the strategies is to use `SeedSequence` which is an algorithm that makes sure that poor input seeds are transformed into good initial RNG states. Additionally, it ensures that close seeds are mapped to very different initial states, resulting in RNGs that are, with very high probability, independent of each other. You can refer to the documentation of [SeedSequence Spawning](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/parallel.html#seedsequence-spawning) for an example on how to generate independent RNGs from a user-provided seed. I here show how you can do this from an already existing RNG and apply it to the [joblib example](https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/auto_examples/parallel_random_state.html#fixing-the-random-state-to-obtain-deterministic-results) mentioned above.
```

rng = np.random.default_rng(seed)
# get the SeedSequence of the passed RNG.
# WARNING: note that this is using a private attribute of
# the RNG and the API might change in the future.
ss = rng.bit_generator._seed_seq
# create 5 initial independent states
child_states = ss.spawn(5)

# use 2 processes to run the stochastic_function 5 times with joblib
random_vector = Parallel(n_jobs=2)(
    delayed(stochastic_function)(random_state) for random_state in child_states
)
print(random_vector)

# rerun to check that we obtain the same outputs
random_vector = Parallel(n_jobs=2)(
    delayed(stochastic_function)(random_state) for random_state in child_states
)
print(random_vector)
```

By using a fixed seed you always get the same results and by using `SeedSequence.spawn` you have an independent RNG for each of the iterations. Note that I used the convenient `default_rng` function in `stochastic_function`. You can also see that the `SeedSequence` of the existing RNG is a private attribute. Accessing the `SeedSequence` might become easier in future versions of NumPy (more information [here](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/15322#issuecomment-626400433)).

> 

Reviewer 2: The end feels a bit abrupt; it may be helpful to have a short conclusion here. It could simply say that the new random API provides safer ways to generate near-independent random streams of numbers, and that the resources below are available for further reading.

---
title: "Good practices with NumPy random number generators"
date: 2023-08-31T23:22:46+02:00
draft: false
description: "
Good practices with NumPy random number generators
"
tags: ["tutorials", numpy, rng]
displayInList: true
author: ["Albert Thomas"]
---

> Unless you are working on a problem where you can afford a true Random Number Generator (RNG), which is basically never for most of us, implementing something random means relying on a pseudo Random Number Generator. I want to share here what I have learned about good practices with pseudo RNGs and especially the ones available in [NumPy](https://numpy.org/).

Author: Well it seems that they exist according to a google search (e.g. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardware_random_number_generator) but I agree that the term can be misleading and that they have their own issues. I just wanted to say here that PRNGs are not the only way to get random numbers but I will remove this.

> Unless you are working on a problem where you can afford a true Random Number Generator (RNG), which is basically never for most of us, implementing something random means relying on a pseudo Random Number Generator. I want to share here what I have learned about good practices with pseudo RNGs and especially the ones available in [NumPy](https://numpy.org/).

Reviewer 2: Yeah, it's a bit weird:

> While "classical" (non-quantum) phenomena are not truly random, an unpredictable physical system is usually acceptable as a source of randomness, so the qualifiers "true" and "physical" are used interchangeably.

In that case, one could consider /dev/urandom truly random as well, since it's connected to a piece of hardware.

> Unless you are working on a problem where you can afford a true Random Number Generator (RNG), which is basically never for most of us, implementing something random means relying on a pseudo Random Number Generator. I want to share here what I have learned about good practices with pseudo RNGs and especially the ones available in [NumPy](https://numpy.org/).

Author: yes I learned something :)

2. Create a new RNG and pass it around using the [`np.random.default_rng`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/generator.html#numpy.random.default_rng) function.
3. Be careful with parallel random number generation and use the [strategies provided by NumPy](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/parallel.html).

Note that, with the older NumPy <1.17, the way to create a new RNG is to use [`np.random.RandomState`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/legacy.html#numpy.random.RandomState) which is based on the popular Mersenne Twister 19937 algorithm. This is also how the global NumPy RNG is created. This function is still available in newer versions of NumPy, but it is now recommended to use `default_rng` instead, which returns an instance of the statistically better [PCG64](https://www.pcg-random.org) RNG. You might still see `np.random.RandomState` being used in tests as it has strong stability guarantees between different NumPy versions.

## Random number generation with NumPy

> When you import `numpy` in your python script, an RNG is created behind the scenes. This RNG is the one used when you generate a new random value using a function such as `np.random.random`. I will here refer to this RNG as the global NumPy RNG.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you import `numpy` in your Python script, an RNG is created behind the scenes. This RNG is the one used when you generate a new random value using a function such as `np.random.random`. I will here refer to this RNG as the global NumPy RNG.
```

To create a new RNG you can use the `default_rng` function as illustrated in the [introduction of the random module documentation](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/index.html):

```python
import numpy as np

rng = np.random.default_rng()
rng.random()  # generate a floating point number between 0 and 1
```

If you want to use a seed for reproducibility, [the NumPy documentation recommends](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/index.html#quick-start) using a very large and unique number to have a different seed than anyone else. Another reason is that using a small number for the seed could lead to a bad first internal state of the RNG leading to a sequence of numbers that would not look like a random sequence, although `default_rng` now takes care of creating a good internal state from a small number. To obtain a good and unique seed you can rely on the [secrets module](https://docs.python.org/3/library/secrets.html). The following code will return a 128 bit number that you can then use as a seed:

```python
import secrets

> secrets.randbits(128)

Reviewer 2: Given that `default_rng` does a good job of seeding from a small number, will 64 suffice? 32?

I suppose it does not matter whether you start with a small or large number, if all you want is reproducibility. Is the concern with small seeds not what happens when you instantiate multiple PRNGs, using x, x+1, x+2, etc?

Author: From my understanding using a large number prevents you (with higher probability) from using the same as someone else. So someone would be able to check if they can confirm the results of a study I did without using the same seed by chance. But please correct me if this not why we would want a different seed than anyone else?

The concern is the same for small and large seeds when you instantiate multiple RNGs using x, x+1 etc... you do not know if your seeds will lead to less independent numbers although again default_rng is supposed to do a good job at creating good initial states from close seeds.

Reviewer 2: You are quite right. So it depends on whether you want independence from others (or subsequent runs of your own), or independence between streams. Often, we only want reproducibility.

```

When running this code I get `65647437836358831880808032086803839626` for the number to use as my seed. This number is randomly generated so you need to copy paste the value that is returned by `secrets.randbits(128)` otherwise you will have a different seed each time you run your code and thus break reproducibility:

```python
import numpy as np

seed = 65647437836358831880808032086803839626
rng = np.random.default_rng(seed)
rng.random()
```

> The reason for seeding your RNG only once (and passing that RNG around) is that with a good RNG such as the one returned by `default_rng` you will be ensured good randomness and independence of the generated numbers. However, if not done properly, using several RNGs (each one created with its own seed) might lead to streams of random numbers that are less independent than the ones created from the same seed. That being said, [as explained by Robert Kern](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/15322#issuecomment-573890207), with the RNGs and seeding strategies introduced in NumPy 1.17, it is considered fairly safe to create RNGs using system entropy, i.e. using `default_rng(None)` multiple times. However as explained later be careful when running jobs in parallel and relying on `default_rng(None)`. Another reason for seeding your RNG only once is that obtaining a good seed can be time consuming. Once you have a good seed to instantiate your generator, you might as well use it.

Reviewer 2: Independence of generated numbers is a property of the algorithm, for any given seed?

Author: Yes for a given seed, the algorithm produces independent random numbers. For two different seeds you do not know whether the number generated by the different seeds conserve this property. For instance your second seed could lead to the internal state that you obtain after 3 calls to the RNG instantiated with the first seeds. Then you will have an overlap of the values generated by the two RNGs. Do you want me to clarify this?

Reviewer 2: Personally, I find these subtleties interesting. Perhaps footnotes? But I leave it up to you.

## Passing a NumPy RNG around

As you write functions that you will use on their own as well as in a more complex script it is convenient to be able to pass a seed or your already created RNG. The function `default_rng` allows you to do this very easily. As written above, this function can be used to create a new RNG from your chosen seed, if you pass a seed to it, or from system entropy when passing `None` but you can also pass an already created RNG. In this case the returned RNG is the one that you passed.

```python
import numpy as np

> def stochastic_function(rng, high=10):

Reviewer 2: Typical signature would be `stochastic_function(high=10, rng=None)` or similar?

Author: Yes true I'll fix this

rng = np.random.default_rng(seed)
# get the SeedSequence of the passed RNG.
# WARNING: note that this is using a private attribute of
# the RNG and the API might change in the future.
ss = rng.bit_generator._seed_seq
# create 5 initial independent states
child_states = ss.spawn(5)

# use 2 processes to run the stochastic_function 5 times with joblib
random_vector = Parallel(n_jobs=2)(
    delayed(stochastic_function)(random_state) for random_state in child_states
)
print(random_vector)

# rerun to check that we obtain the same outputs
random_vector = Parallel(n_jobs=2)(
    delayed(stochastic_function)(random_state) for random_state in child_states
)
print(random_vector)
```

By using a fixed seed you always get the same results and by using `SeedSequence.spawn` you have an independent RNG for each of the iterations. Note that I used the convenient `default_rng` function in `stochastic_function`. You can also see that the `SeedSequence` of the existing RNG is a private attribute. Accessing the `SeedSequence` might become easier in future versions of NumPy (more information [here](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/15322#issuecomment-626400433)).

> I hope this blog post helped you understand the best ways to use Numpy RNGs. The new Numpy API gives you all the tools you need for that. The resources below are available for further reading. Finally, I would like to thank Pamphile Roy, Stefan van der Walt and Jarrod Millman for their great feedbacks and comments which contributed to greatly improve the original version of this blog post.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I hope this blog post helped you understand the best ways to use NumPy RNGs. The new Numpy API gives you all the tools you need for that. The resources below are available for further reading. Finally, I would like to thank Pamphile Roy, Stefan van der Walt and Jarrod Millman for their great feedbacks and comments which contributed to greatly improve the original version of this blog post.
```

---
title: "Best Practices for Using NumPy's Random Number Generators"
date: 2024-01-26T23:22:46+02:00
draft: false
description: "
Best Practices for Using NumPy's Random Number Generators
"
tags: [tutorials, numpy, rng]
displayInList: true
author: ["Albert Thomas"]
---

I want to share here what I have learned about best practices with pseudo RNGs and especially the ones available in [NumPy](https://numpy.org/).

> A pseudo RNG works by updating an internal state through a deterministic algorithm. The internal state is initialized with a value known as a seed and each update of this internal state produces a number that appears randomly generated. The key here is that the process is deterministic, meaning that if you start with the same seed and apply the same algorithm, you will get the same sequence of internal states (and numbers). Despite this determinism, the resulting numbers exhibit properties of randomness, appearing unpredictable and evenly distributed. Users can either specify the seed manually, providing a degree of control over the generated sequence, or they can opt to let the RNG object automatically derive the seed from system entropy. The latter approach enhances unpredictability by incorporating external factors into the seed.

Reviewer 2: Remember to say what RNG stands for and what it is, before diving in

Author: indeed, done :)
